bring the milder air to the UK. You
ran see it coming
can see it coming up from the Azores
ran see it coming up from the Azores
on a
can see it coming up from the Azores
on a south—westerly, the yellow and
on a south-westerty, the yellow and
orange
on a south-westerly, the yellow and
orange colours
on a south—westerly, the yellow and
orange colours indicate it will be
mild for the time of year. They will
not be well sunshine across the
not be wall sunshine across the
country. It’s
not be well sunshine across the
country. It’s going to be pretty
cloudy to start and that band of
cloud and rain associated with the
weather front will march across
England and Wales, becoming confined
England and Walas, becoming confined
to
England and Wales, becoming confined
to the south—east. Skies will tend
to the south-east. Skies will tend
to brighten up
to the south—east. Skies will tend
to brighten up for many but lots of
blustery showers in the north and
west of Scotland, some heavy and
merging together to produce longer
spells of rain. A blustery day
across the board. Gusts of 40—50
across the board. Gusts of 40-50
milas an
across the board. Gusts of 40—50
miles an hour. Look at the
temperatures for late January,
temperatures for late january,
13-14, we
temperatures for late January,
13—1A, we could see 15 degrees
13-14, we could see 15 degrees
across
13—1A, we could see 15 degrees
across eastern England. As we head
through Friday night it stays
blustery, further showers, long
spells of rain across the North
West, variable cloud in the south,
and into the weekend it stays
CROWD STOMPS AND CLAPS
HE LAUGHS
OVER HEADPHONES: But, no,
I genuinely didn’t want to come on.
Mate, the offer’s there.
Oh, God, I’m funny.
That Peter Crouch Podcast —
it’s back,
stronger and funnier than ever.
# Ireland, Ireland
# Together standing tall
# Shoulder to shoulder... #
When the stakes are this high,
it comes down to who blinks first.
Tonight, we are in Buxton. Welcome
to Question Time. On tonight plasma
panel, jame
panel, Jame Cleverly, former Brexit
panel, jame Cleverty, former Brexit
minister
panel, Jame Cleverly, former Brexit
minister under Theresa May and Leave
campaigner in the EU referendum, now
chairman of
campaigner in the EU referendum, new
chairman of the Conservative Party.
A member of the Labour Party since
A member of the labour Party since
the age of 19,
A member of the Labour Party since
the age of 19, worked for the
housing charity shelter and the NHS
before being elected an MP in 2017,
Sarah jones.
Sarahjones. Minette Batters, the
Sarah jones. Minette Batters, the
first
Sarahjones. Minette Batters, the
first female president the National
Farmers’ Union, runs her own family
farming Wiltshire. Sacha Lord, runs
farming wiltshire. Sacha Lord, runs
the
farming Wiltshire. Sacha Lord, runs
the Warehouse Project. Manchester’s
first night tsar. Comedian and guest
on shows like Mock the Week, Geoff
Norcott. APPLAUSE
Welcome to our panel, to the
audience and to you at home. Don’t
forget, you ran
forget, you canjoin in the
conversation on social media. Right,
let’s get started with our first
question from Jack Hadfield. Thank
question from jack Hadfield. Thank
you. Should
question from Jack Hadfield. Thank
you. Should the Department for
Transport and the Treasury shoulder
the majority of the blame for
failures of Northern Rail? Northern
Rail, which I imagine quite a lot of
you use here in the audience, since
it is the only line I think you can
it is the only line I think you ran
use from
it is the only line I think you can
use from Buxton. Sarah, do you want
to kick as off? Just been taken back
to kick as off? just been taken back
into
to kick as off? Just been taken back
into government control? It has,
renationalising it. Good to see they
are following our lead. The
government has no real strategy.
Chris Grayling, we remember,
famously said I am not in charge of
the trains. Most of you will have
suffered under Northern Rail and
most of us have suffered under the
rail network as we find it now. This
is the second line now that the
government have decided to
renationalise, only on a temporary
way. The question is why did it take
so long? We knew it was rubbish for
so long before they acted. Why
so long before they acted. why
didn’t they
so long before they acted. Why
didn’t they act faster? And what
reassurances have they put in place?
None yet, that was say actually we
will stop the delays, reinvest in
the infrastructure and we will make
the infrastmclure and we will make
sure we get a
the infrastructure and we will make
sure we get a better deal for
customers. For me, rail
nationalisation make sense partly
because it’s actually quite simple.
There are no assets you have to buy
back when the franchises come up,
you ran take
you can take them into public
you ran take them into public
control
you can take them into public
control and say let’s put customers
first, service first, security first
and let’s make sure we run the rail
and let’s make sure we nm the rail
companies in the
and let’s make sure we run the rail
companies in the way that works for
us and not just
us and notjust for those privatised
us and not just for those privatised
companies. I
us and notjust for those privatised
companies. I think,
companies. Ithink, why
us and notjust for those privatised
companies. I think, why didn’t they
do it before, why has it taken so
long, why don’t we go further?
Sacha, as Manchester’s nightlife
guru...
gum... Am I
Sacha, as Manchester’s nightlife
guru... Am I the only northerner on
gum... Am I the only northerner on
the panel? We
guru... Am I the only northerner on
the panel? We have an audience full
of them! Obviously. For me, D D
franchising is absolutely welcomed.
It is long, long overdue. I think
the difference between London
transport and the transport in the
North is an absolute disgrace. It’s
like comparing the premiership in
London to Vauxhall conference
league. The mayors in the North,
Steve Rotherham and Andy Burnham, on
a daily basis have been complaining
to the government. I know people who
have lost their jobs
have lost theirjobs because they
have been waiting for these old
trains to turn up, they’re
cancelled, they turn up late, they
are consistently late for work and
when they do get on them, they are
overcrowded. It is not right. Why
overcrowded. It is not right. why
does a
overcrowded. It is not right. Why
does a bus in London cost £1, a bus
in Manchester costs £A? There is a
in Manchester costs £4? There is a
great
in Manchester costs £A? There is a
great integrated
in Manchester costs fir? There is a
great integrated transport system in
London that is capped at £10. In
London that is rapped at £10. In
Greater
London that is capped at £10. In
Greater Manchester, you can spend
Greater Manchester, you ran spend
20- BO
Greater Manchester, you can spend
20- £30 in
20— £30 in a day. I think it’s not
20- £30 in a day. I think it’s not
fair and it’s great
20— £30 in a day. I think it’s not
fair and it’s great we have seen a
slight sign the government are
listening to what we in Greater
Manchester and Buxton have been
asking for. It’s about time, it’s
long, long overdue. APPLAUSE
So the question, James, is how much
So the question, james, is how much
should the
So the question, James, is how much
should the Department for Transport
and the Treasury, the government,
shoulder the blame for the failures
of Northern Rail. There are those
who argue that the timetable was set
for Northern Rail by the government
and was undeliverable and the
infrastructure was not there. The
infrastmclure was not there. The
new railway
infrastructure was not there. The
new railway lines were not there,
the updates Manchester Piccadilly
just went there in order for
Northern Rail... I’m not saying they
have done everything right but the
Northern Rail to deliver the
timetable in 2018, when hundreds of
timetabla in 2018, when hundreds of
trains
timetable in 2018, when hundreds of
trains were cancelled in a day?
trains were ancellad in a day?
Well, it’s
trains were cancelled in a day?
Well, it’s absolutely right that the
government has taken Northern Rail
or is in the process of taking
Northern Rail back into public
ownership, public management. How
much do you take the blame for what
has happened at Northern Rail? I
think we should remind ourselves
that the franchising of our rail
network has seen record levels of
investment, record increases in
passenger numbers. The government is
now committed to extending the rail
network so it reaches more parts of
the country forced at Northern Rail
has not worked and that is why
Northern Rail has been brought back
into public ownership. Do you think
the government has any role in
Northern Rail not working? The
government always has a role to play
government always has a rola to play
in a public
government always has a role to play
in a public transport network but
the vast majority of the rail
network in the country, we have seen
increased passenger numbers,
increased investment, new rolling
stock. That has not happened in
Northern Rail. The pace of trains
are long, long past their sell by
date. The Prime Minister made it
clear when he was campaigning that
that would be resolved. I’m very
pleased to see he is once again
delivering on the promises he made
in his leadership campaign. The
promises we made in the general
election campaign and we are getting
elaction campaign and we are getting
a grip on what
election campaign and we are getting
a grip on what has been a failing
service. Right, quite a few hands
up. You, sir? I’ve been a Northern
Rail customer for the last three to
four years. What would you call it?
four years. what would you all it?
A disgrace is
four years. What would you call it?
A disgrace is probably the polite
term. The first thing I do in the
morning when my alarm goes off is
which train is cancelled and if I
which train is ancellad and if I
will get to
which train is cancelled and if I
will get to work on time. I agree,
if there is the south of the border
it would have been fixed yesterday.
As commuters, we welcome it but what
will happen in the next two or three
years? will we
years? Will we see an immediate
years? will we see an immediate
change or will
years? Will we see an immediate
change or will we have to wait even
longer for that?
longerforthat? 0K.
change or will we have to wait even
longerforthat? OK. I
longerforthat? 0K. Iwould
change or will we have to wait even
longerfor that? OK. I would like to
longer for that? OK. I would like to
take you to
longerfor that? OK. I would like to
take you to task when you say there
is more investment in the railways.
MY
My sons work in London. They go to
some pancreas on a Friday night, the
last ticket he bought was £160 and
he didn’t get a seat. Now, it’s
almost impacting on family and now,
that families cannot go around the
that families rannot go around the
country and
that families cannot go around the
country and be transported on your
railway network because of the
overcrowding, the expense, the
delays, the cancellations. It’s an
absolute joke.
absolutejoke. The railway network
absolute joke. The railway network
is a joke.
absolutejoke. The railway network
is a joke. APPLAUSE
And you? Spent per capita in the
And you? Spent per rapita in the
north of
And you? Spent per capita in the
north of England on public transport
is two and a half times less than
is two and a half times lass than
that in
is two and a half times less than
that in London. How can that be
that in London. How ran that be
justified? The
that in London. How can that be
justified? The lady in the yellow
scarf? I would like to ask
scarf? I would like to askJame
scarf? I would like to ask jame
Cleverty,
scarf? I would like to askJame
Cleverly, what specifically we are
Cleverty, what specifically we are
going to see
Cleverly, what specifically we are
going to see by way of changes and
when? What will be different and
when? what will be different and
when
when? What will be different and
when will we see it? I will come to
the rest of the panel but you can
the rest of the panel but you ran
come in on
the rest of the panel but you can
come in on this. Ten years more or
lass of
less of Conservative government.
Person calling the railway disgrace
and some other saying when will it
be different and what he
be different and what be different?
The announcement has only
The announcement has onlyjust come
The announcement has only just come
out. I
out. Iran’t
The announcement has onlyjust come
out. I can’t and I am not in a
position to give you the kind of
detail that you are asking for at
the moment. The reason the
government has taken it in houses
because we have listened to the
anger and the complaints from people
anger and the complaints from peopla
that
anger and the complaints from people
that use a service and we are
responding to that. The Prime
Minister has said is enough is
enough, you have had enough second
chances, no more excuses, we are
taking this off you, we’re going to
make improvements, going to make
sure there is more rolling stock and
that it services the people that
rely on for work and to get... To
see family or whatever reason you
might use the train service. The
gentleman who said the differential
between transport investment in the
south of the country in the north of
the country is completely out of
kilter is absolutely right. This is
one of the big lessons that I think
one of the big lassons that I think
politicians
one of the big lessons that I think
politicians should have learned a
number of years ago... In the last
ten years? when
ten years? When millions of people
ten years? when millions of peopla
in the country
ten years? When millions of people
in the country said we are not happy
with the status quo. The
Conservative Party took that lesson
Conservative Party took that lasson
on
Conservative Party took that lesson
on board which is why we are taking
a very different approach to
regional policy and making sure we
increase the investment in the North
of England. Will you level up?
Absolutely, the Prime Minister made
that commitment and this is the
first of a number of delivery on the
promises that we made. For me, we
are talking about trains, it’s not
just poor trains in the north but
poor transport in general. We have
sat here in
set here in Buxton. Buxton is an
sat here in Buxton. Buxton is an
absolute
set here in Buxton. Buxton is an
absolute bottleneck for traffic,
it’s an absolute nightmare. I’m sure
you are aware of that. I was amazed
today that I had two major cities,
Manchester and Sheffield, had the
poorest connection between the two
cities in the whole of Europe. They
are major cities. It needs looking
at and quickly. I think we need to
be giving more powers to people
be giving more powers to peopla
locally. The
be giving more powers to people
locally. The people in Westminster
locally. The peopla in Westminster
don’t
locally. The people in Westminster
don’t know what’s best for people in
Greater Manchester. We need more
powers in Greater Manchester. 50,
powers in Greater Manchester. So,
for example,
powers in Greater Manchester. 50,
for example, the mayor of Greater
Manchester, Liverpool... They need
the powers, they know what is right
to the buses and trains. We need to
have more power devolved up here.
Minutes? Behalf of the members I
represent, 10,000 farmers across
represent, 47,000 farmers across
England and
represent, 10,000 farmers across
England and Wales, 3 lot of them are
England and Walas, a lot of them are
living in very
England and Wales, 3 lot of them are
living in very rural communities,
living in very mral communities,
pub“:
living in very rural communities,
public transport absolutely vital
for them and I would very much agree
with what Sacha says in the
gentleman in the blue at the back. I
think this has been London centric.
We have had a two tier public
transport system and it is failing
and it is failing very many parts of
the country that need it most. 50 we
the country that need it most. So we
have to
the country that need it most. 50 we
have to prioritise the investment. I
think it is great that it is being
brought back in—house but we cannot
brought back in-house but we cannot
tarry on
carry on with
brought back in—house but we cannot
carry on with this two tier system
and I think there a lot of the
problems with bricks and anything
problams with bricks and anything
else,
problems with bricks and anything
else, everyone thinks everything is
driven by Londoners in London it is
out of touch with the rural parts of
out of touch with the mral parts of
the country,
out of touch with the rural parts of
the country, particularly in Buxton,
the country, particularty in Buxton,
a very mral part
the country, particularly in Buxton,
a very rural part of the country.
a very mral part of the country.
People feel
a very rural part of the country.
People feel let down and
disadvantaged. Geoff Norcott? It’s
interesting, this far right Boris
johnson
Johnson government and one of the
johnson government and one of the
first act is
Johnson government and one of the
first act is to nationalise a rail
provider. In fairness,
provider. Infairness, I’m have
provider. In fairness, I’m have
given a lot
provider. Infairness, I’m have
given a lot stick to
given a lot stick toJeremy Corbyn
given a lot stick to jeremy Corbyn
over the
given a lot stick to Jeremy Corbyn
over the years and this is one
argument that won the argument. I’m
a little uncomfortable about
governments getting too involved a
new hope is temporary. But I Sacha
brought up, the ridiculous thing in
this country is the North to South
links are the ones away looked at
that if you want to go side to side,
there is some sort of weird
prejudice against that. You might as
well just get a
welljust get a new
prejudice against that. You might as
well just get a new all.
welljust get a new all. Everyone
well just get a new all. Everyone
nodding their
welljust get a new all. Everyone
nodding their heads in the audience.
What’s the prejudice against side to
what’s the prejudice against side to
side quest
What’s the prejudice against side to
side quest about services connecting
Manchester and Sheffield, the
trans—Pennine express, Brilliant
trans-Pennine express, Brilliant
staff in a
trans—Pennine express, Brilliant
staff in a heroic commitment to the
Buffy in a single carriage train but
Buffy in a singla carriage train but
we talk
Buffy in a single carriage train but
we talk about connecting the north
with London, how about connecting
the north with the North? Yeah,
right. APPLAUSE
Lets pick up on that point. Let’s
follow on from what you are saying,
Geoff. julie
Geoff. Julie Ollernshaw? Is HS2 the
Geoff. julie Ollernshaw? Is HSZ the
best way to
Geoff. Julie Ollernshaw? Is HS2 the
best way to spark infrastructure
revolution?
So, there has been a bit of a
meeting today with Boris Johnson,
meeting today with Boris johnson,
with
meeting today with Boris Johnson,
with the Transport Secretary Grant
Sharps
Shapps and Sergei Javid.
with the Transport Secretary Grant
Shapps and Sergeijavid. Were
Shapps and Sergei Javid. Were you
Shapps and Sergei javid. Were you
there,
Shapps and Sergei Javid. Were you
there, James? No, I
there, James? No, Iwas
Shapps and Sergei Javid. Were you
there, James? No, I was on my way
there, james? No, I was on my way
here on a
there, James? No, I was on my way
here on a Pacer train. When we were
here on a Pacer train. when we were
on our way here,
here on a Pacer train. When we were
on our way here, the train was
cancelled. Couldn’t get on the first
train because it was overcrowded, I
feel your pain. The review is
looking at the whole situation
around HSZ, the cost and the
sequencing and that kind of stuff.
Is anyone dissenting in the cabinet?
The Cabinet the way cabinets work
and the Premier because making this
clear, is we come to a collective
clear, is we come to a collactive
decision in
clear, is we come to a collective
decision in private and then once we
have come to a collective decision,
have come to a collactive decision,
that is the
have come to a collective decision,
that is the decision of the whole
cabinet, the whole government. That
will be quite a novelty, we haven’t
seen that in quite a
seen that in quite along
will be quite a novelty, we haven’t
seen that in quite a long time!
Things are changing under the new
Prime Minister and changing for the
better. You are in favour? I think
it’s absolutely key and as Geoff was
saying, I
saying, Ithink
it’s absolutely key and as Geoff was
saying, I think there is unanimity
on the panel here, that’s big parts
of the country, particularly in the
of the country, particularty in the
North of
of the country, particularly in the
North of England, have not been as
well serviced by public transport
and other things as they should be.
And making sure that that is
addressed is absolutely a priority.
HSZ is
HS2 is one of the options, obviously
HSZ is one of the options, obviously
there are
HS2 is one of the options, obviously
there are concerns about some of the
cost projections about that and that
will need to be looked at. But the
broader point I want to make is the
government is absolutely committed
to making sure that the whole of the
to making sure that the whola of the
country in
to making sure that the whole of the
country in every community across
the country, is properly connected
the country, is property connected
and ran
the country, is properly connected
and can feel the benefit of the
and ran feel the benefit of the
growth in
and can feel the benefit of the
growth in the UK economy? Julie,
growth in the UK economy? julie,
what is your
growth in the UK economy? Julie,
what is your view?
ﬂ
I think we are better to be able to
cross the country by Northern Rail
rather than HS2
rather than H52 and the amount of
money and, by the time it gets to
the north, whether it will be
obsolete. The man at the front. I
obsolate. The man at the front. I
think
obsolete. The man at the front. I
think there is a brilliant missed
opportunity to connect Derby with
Buxton, and therefore Nottingham and
Derby with Manchester, by reopening
a line which is 12 miles long and
a line which is 12 mils long and
probably
a line which is 12 miles long and
probably wouldn’t cost as much as
HSZ,
H52, and that is a whole, you know,
you could get a connection from
Lincoln to Nottingham, and that
would connect the east with the law.
HSZ, is it the best to
infrastructure revolution? I think
infrastmclure revolution? I think
we probably
infrastructure revolution? I think
we probably wouldn’t start from this
point, but the issue with HS2 is
point, but the issue with HSZ is
it’s been
point, but the issue with HS2 is
it’s been going round for ten years,
we’ve spent about 9 billion, a huge
amount of money, and 2000 people are
amount of money, and 2000 peopla are
working on it.
amount of money, and 2000 people are
working on it. Seven billion already
spent. Work is under way, we are not
starting from scratch, so I think we
have to go for it. This country is
really bad at finishing large
infrastructure projects, so we have
infrastmclure projects, so we have
to do this,
infrastructure projects, so we have
to do this, but not at the expense
of everything else, and we had an
announcement two years ago from the
government that they were going to
reopen all of the tracks that had
been closed by the preaching review,
so 5000 miles worth of tracks that
so 5000 milas worth of tracks that
we
so 5000 miles worth of tracks that
we were
we were promised it was a 500
million funding to help restore some
of the railway lines. They have
promised £500 million, and I am told
that will get you between 25 and 50
miles worth of track, so the tracks
milas worth of track, so the tracks
that
miles worth of track, so the tracks
that were closed in this area, are
they going to be reopened or not?
Are we going to be looking at some
of those replacements? There is also
a big review going on at the moment
the Department for Transport about
whether or not we have a whole new
system of the rail network, but it’s
taking a very long time to stop they
are doing it piecemeal. You go into
the Department for Transport and one
person deals with that franchise,
one person deals with that one, and
none of them ever talk to each
other, none of them can do anything
other, none of them ran do anything
for I did a project
other, none of them can do anything
for I did a project once on
ticketing, and trying to get a
ticket that gets you to one place to
another as cheap as possible, and
it’s virtually impossible. Yes, we
need to do HSZ, we need to do far
more in terms of infrastructure
development, because we are running
development, because we are mnning
on
development, because we are running
on Victorian lines at the moment,
and we need to expect more. Our
country, our transport system is a
bit of an embarrassment, compared to
other European countries, so we
really need to step up and invest.
who in
Who in the audience supports the
who in the audience supports the
building of
Who in the audience supports the
building of HS2? Yes, sir.
Absolutely, we need to start
increasing the connectivity to the
north, but the question which was
asked earlier, which hasn’t been
asked eartier, which hasn’t been
answered,
asked earlier, which hasn’t been
answered, is the cost to the
individual user. It’s a huge
disincentive to use the railways,
when it costs £250 for an open
return from Macclesfield to London,
return from Macdasfield to London,
a
return from Macclesfield to London,
a scandalous amount of money for the
lady said eartier,
lady said earlier, you may or may
lady said eartier, you may or may
not get seat for
lady said earlier, you may or may
not get seat for that price. Sacha
Lord. (“are
Lord. Care it’s a great question,
Lord. (“are it’s a great question,
julie, and fully
Lord. Care it’s a great question,
Julie, and fully support HSZ. It has
julie, and fully support HSZ. It has
to go to
Julie, and fully support HSZ. It has
to go to Manchester. Even though we
don’t know how much it will cost?
This is the thing I can’t get my
head around, from a business point
of view. Somebody in the department
has been paid a lot of money to set
out -- sit
out —— sit down and budget HSZ,
has been paid a lot of money to set
out —— sit down and budget H52, and
out -- sit down and budget H52, and
they came up
out —— sit down and budget H52, and
they came up with 38 billion, then
60 billion, and now it is nearer 100
million. How can somebody get
million. How ran somebody get
something
million. How can somebody get
something so wrong? I
something so wrong? Ijust find it
unfashionable. Click Geoff Norcott.
unfashionable. (lick Geoff Norcott.
The way the
unfashionable. Click Geoff Norcott.
The way the quote is going up, they
must be using the same builder I do,
he keeps going, that will be... Is
it true, james,
it true, James, that part of the
it true, james, that part of the
expanding
it true, James, that part of the
expanding price is because they have
asked the procurement policy look
across such a big timeframe, like,
25 years? I wonder, if that is where
the wiggle room is, and Boris
strapped something on and perhaps
they slightly change the rubric for
procurement, they be free up enough
money to deliver greater services in
the north. Do you support HS2? I
the north. Do you support HST! I
worry, if not
the north. Do you support HS2? I
worry, if not HSZ, what? And I think
worry, if not HSZ, what? And Ithink
there is a
worry, if not HSZ, what? And I think
there is a problem in this country,
with all respect to the people of
Birmingham, if you look of the
population and significance of
London, this country is unlike many
others. In Spain, there are Madrid
and Barcelona, there are New York
and Chicago, but London skews the
whola country,
whole country, so it has to be done,
whola country, so it has to be done,
just not at any
whole country, so it has to be done,
just not at any cost. Minette
just not at any cost. Minette, what
is your view? Is it the best return
on investment, or would that
investment be better made in
Northern Rail and delivering on a
much broader basis? For
much broader basis? Forfarmers,
much broader basis? For farmers,
this has
much broader basis? Forfarmers,
this has been absolutely huge. It’s
been ongoing for ten years. We have
had land
had [and that has been compulsorily
had land that has been compulsorily
purchased,
had [and that has been compulsorily
purchased, houses being compulsorily
purchased, and in many cases that
transaction has not been completed,
those farmers have not been paid for
that, they have sacrificed
businesses. I have had farmers with
tears in their eyes who have had to
dose
close their farm shop, close all of
their diversification, wedding
businesses, and ten years and still
not knowing, so that’s been a
massive issue. We have also, I
think, got to look at infrastructure
think, got to look at infrastmclure
and
think, got to look at infrastructure
and investment and where it goes.
This is going through historic
ancient woodland that is
irreplaceable, and the damage to
nature and the environment on the
back of that doesn’t seem to be
talked about nearly enough. We will
talked about nearty enough. We will
not replace it
talked about nearly enough. We will
not replace it with like for like.
We do the same with house—building,
We do the same with house-building,
we don’t
We do the same with house—building,
we don’t prioritise housing land for
where we will produce food, and
going forward, with climate change,
we have to prioritise infrastructure
we have to prioritise infrastmclure
and talk
we have to prioritise infrastructure
and talk about food production,
about nature, and we have to be
responsible across society. Do you
think we should go ahead? Little of
a return on the investment? 50 many
a return on the investment? So many
people don’t
a return on the investment? 50 many
people don’t know. —— will it
peopla don’t know. -- will it
deliver a
people don’t know. —— will it
deliver a return. Only people don’t
deliver a return. Only peopla don’t
know
deliver a return. Only people don’t
know about the businesses it has
destroyed, the woodland it will
destroy, and what those farmers in
that part of the country feel, in
Warwickshire and Staffordshire, is
they need an ombudsman to represent
them to make the case. It has been
them to make the use. It has been
ten years. So you
them to make the case. It has been
ten years. So you haven’t taken a
view on this yet, in terms of
representing farmers? We have taken
a view to represent farmers and make
sure their concerns are heard, but
nobody has no if it will happen or
not, and its destroyed lives in its
wake, so we have to look at
infrastructure, where it will go, in
infrastmclure, where it will go, in
the whola
infrastructure, where it will go, in
the whole round, and the point
the whole round, and the pointJulie
the whole round, and the point julie
makes is, is
the whole round, and the pointJulie
makes is, is that investment not
betting to Northern Rail as a whole,
on a wider basis, rather than just
HSZ, with all of the ramifications?
I get the feeling, and looking at
your face is now,
yourface is now, that we
I get the feeling, and looking at
your face is now, that we could talk
about rail all night. Let’s not do
that, because you put lots of other
questions in,
questions in, so I’m going to move
on but, before I do that, just to
55V
say that next week we will be in
Hopkinton in Hertfordshire, and the
week after that we will be in
Dundee, joined by crime writer Val
McDermid. If you want to be in the
audience, all
audience, call this number or go to
audience, all this number or go to
the
audience, call this number or go to
the website.
Let’s get off rail for now, and hope
we will go back later. Jennifer
we will go back later. jennifer
Murphy. Is it
we will go back later. Jennifer
Murphy. Is it really safe to apply
anyone out of Wuhan back to the UK,
given
anyone out of Wuhan hack to the UK,
given the
anyone out of Wuhan back to the UK,
given the severity of the
coronavirus? Would you rather that
we left them there, honestly? Yes, I
think they should be quarantined
there. Even it is like a plague, it
seems, I
seems, Idon’t
there. Even it is like a plague, it
seems, I don’t know the mortality
rate and whether it kills everybody
who is affected, I don’t know, but I
think they should stay there. It
isn’t killing everybody affected,
because thousands of people have
been affected and over a hundred had
died, but it certainly hasn’t,
otherwise there would be about 7000
people dead. Geoff Norcott, leave
them there? I was really hoping
you’d come for me on this! It is one
of these things, these new stories
ticking over, so when I’m watching
Question Time, I often think, you
don’t know what you are talking
about, make, let somebody else have
a go, so I will keep brief... Good
for you! Nobody has ever said that
on my time on Question Time! Do you
think we know what we are talking
about? Whereas this is an issue
about? whereas this is an issue
where
about? Whereas this is an issue
where China is historically
sometimes a bit guarded in this
respect, they are being quite open,
and I think that’s constructive, but
I will let the experts take over.
You are looking quite exercised
about it. I can’t quite understand
what is going on because first of
all we are told there will be self
isolation, secondly, we are told
there is quarantine. Yes, they will
be a hospital. Then we are told they
will be coming back by playing
together and go to a military
building, where they will be
together until there is no symptom
appearing, and so, also, what will
happen in the aeroplane with the air
conditioning, with the 200 people
conditioning, with the 200 peopla
coming back
conditioning, with the 200 people
coming back together? I am a bit
concerned about these people coming
back. In case one infected person
back. In use one infected person
would
back. In case one infected person
would infect everybody else? Yes,
infecting the whole plane. Since
january,
January, there are 1500 that
january, there are 1500 that
actually
January, there are 1500 that
actually come back
actually come back from China,
Wuhan, and only if you have been
trackabla,
trackable, apparently. So where are
trackabla, apparently. So where are
these peopla,
trackable, apparently. So where are
these people, and are the public at
risk? We haven’t had an outbreak
yet. Fergus Walsh was on television
yet. Fergus Walsh was on telavision
saying it, and it
yet. Fergus Walsh was on television
saying it, and it was also in the
papers about the amount, in the
newspapers, in the Guardian and
Telegraph. Sacha Lord, should we be
Telagraph. Sacha Lord, should we be
ﬂying peopla
Telegraph. Sacha Lord, should we be
flying people back? We have seen
ﬂying people back? We have seen
lots of
flying people back? We have seen
lots of people on the news desperate
to come home. On that, I am not
qualified to answer
qualified to answerJennifer’s
qualified to answer jennifer’s
question,
qualified to answerJennifer’s
question, but I did find out
question, but I did find outlast
question, but I did find out last
week, a fact
question, but I did find outlast
week, a fact I never knew, that
Wuhan is twinned with Manchester,
which is a new one for me. I think
the government did a really, really
poor job,
poorjob, actually, when the news
poor job, actually, when the news
first broke,
poorjob, actually, when the news
first broke, so there are 9 million
peopla. To
people. To give you an idea,
Manchester is 2.8 million, Scotland
is 5 million. Their advice was to
get out of the area. When it is
get out of the area. when it is
under
get out of the area. When it is
under lockdown and there is no
pub“:
public transport and you can’t
drive, you have got people watching
drive, you have got peopla watching
on the
drive, you have got people watching
on the news, clinic and for their
lives, skying interview is over, how
are you supposed to get out?!
Panicking for their lives. And I see
today that there is a plane, people
being ﬂown
being flown back to the Wirral, but
being ﬂown back to the “ﬁnal, but
I think it
being flown back to the Wirral, but
I think it was too little, too late,
and we should have followed other
countries’ examples. The woman in
countries“ examples. The woman in
the glasses. I am
countries’ examples. The woman in
the glasses. I am a local GP and,
the glasses. I am a [oral GP and,
with regards to
the glasses. I am a local GP and,
with regards to the coronavirus, I
with regards to the coronavims, I
think the
with regards to the coronavirus, I
think the government have done a
good job. I
goodjob. I have
think the government have done a
good job. I have a brilliant amount
of information very quickly. I think
the problem is the press, they are
scaremongering, not giving the right
information.
APPLAUSE
Let’s have some of it now.
Hopefully, Fergus is doing a
reasonable job.
reasonablejob. What
Hopefully, Fergus is doing a
reasonable job. What about what the
reasonabla job. what about what the
lady was
reasonable job. What about what the
lady was saying there about
everybody coming back on the plane,
and will they end up infecting each
other? It’s an incredibly contagious
form of the flu virus, essentially,
form of the ﬂu virus, essentially,
and what
form of the flu virus, essentially,
and what nobody ever talks about is
the military staff and medical
staff,
the military staff and mediral
staff, they
the military staff and medical
staff, they are likely to be
carriers and are going to infect
peopla, but
people, but where do they go? Almost
peopla, but where do they go? Almost
as many
people, but where do they go? Almost
as many questions as answers. Sarah?
150 peopla are
150 people are flying back tonight.
150 peopla are ﬂying back tonight.
Possibly, as
150 people are flying back tonight.
Possibly, as we speak. Was this the
right move? I wouldn’t claim to be
an expert. I think the point about
China doing the right thing this
time is right, they have been much
more open, and I think, you know,
more open, and Ithink, you know,
I’m not making a
more open, and I think, you know,
I’m not making a point about exit
but I’m just saying, when we leave,
we need to make sure we have got
those cross government, cross
country working together, because
actually this has no borders. I
think there has been criticism of
the government in that they have
been a bit slower to act than other
countries. I think the information
that peopla
that people have got has been, and
maybe it is the government’s full,
maybe it’s the public health role to
get that information out, but are
peopla being
people being screened or not? Are
they being brought or not? We have
heard interviews on the radio with
people in Wuhan who are trying to
peopla in Wuhan who are trying to
come back,
people in Wuhan who are trying to
come back, who feel they are on
their own and not getting the help
they need. Do you think it’s the
right thing to bring them back? Of
course, if we can, and I think
course, if we ran, and I think
quarantine is
course, if we can, and I think
quarantine is the sensible approach.
I would say that we do public—health
I would say that we do public-health
really well in
I would say that we do public—health
really well in this country, but
there has been a huge cut to the
budgets, and our diplomatic service
is at a 20 year low in terms of
funding, so the embassy, in China
they will be struggling, and we will
be struggling with our public health
be stmggling with our public health
approach
be struggling with our public health
approach because we don’t have the
resources we once had but I think,
is a country, we tend to be quite
good at managing these crises, and
we all need to make sure we are not
trying to scaremonger. A lot of
trying to sraremonger. A lot of
ﬂights have
trying to scaremonger. A lot of
flights have now been cancelled
ﬂights have now been ancellad
coming in
flights have now been cancelled
coming in and out of the whole of
coming in and out of the whola of
China.
coming in and out of the whole of
China. There are a lot of people in
the whole of China that might need
to come back and, if this escalates
quickly, we need to know what is the
government plans to its just been
declared a global emergency by the
World Health Organisation tonight
from an NFU perspective, I am not
from an NFU perspective, lam not
entirely sure
from an NFU perspective, I am not
entirely sure what your view on this
would be, but
would be, butJennifer’s point,
would be, butjennifer’s point,
don’t
would be, butJennifer’s point,
don’t think it is a good idea to fly
don’t think it is a good idea to ﬂy
peopla back,
don’t think it is a good idea to fly
people back, despite the pleading we
have been hearing over the airwaves.
jennifer, I
Jennifer, I sympathise with that,
jennifer, I sympathise with that,
but I
Jennifer, I sympathise with that,
but I think if you or I were out
there we would probably be pretty
desperate to come back. You know,
it’s a really complex virus, and it
ran
ranjump from
it’s a really complex virus, and it
canjumpfrom animal
canjumpfrom animalto
it’s a really complex virus, and it
canjump from animal to human, and
ranjump from animal to human, and
it shows
canjump from animal to human, and
it shows how different China is to
hear. This was at a wet market in
Wuhan where they bring in live
animals, they have snakes, marmots
and bats, and the feeling is that
and hats, and the feeling is that
this jumped
and bats, and the feeling is that
this jumped from a bat
this jumped from a bet to a domestic
this jumped from a hat to a domestic
animal, and that was how it was
passed on to humans. I think there
are big lessons to be learnt in how
these things are spread, how these
vimses
viruses spread, how they mutate, and
vimses spread, how they mutate, and
it is a real
viruses spread, how they mutate, and
it is a real lesson, I guess, in the
whola
whole standards. China had that
horrendous outbreak whereby they had
contaminated baby milk, and they put
56,000 babies in hospital, and so
56,000 babies in hospital, and sol
think we have to learn from what has
happened, and I am sure the Chinese,
they seem to have reacted really
quickly to this, but they will have
big lassons
big lessons to learn on the back of
big lassons to learn on the back of
this that, if you
big lessons to learn on the back of
this that, if you have live animals,
wild animals coming into markets
where there is food being sold, this
is how these things can jump,
is how these things canjump, and
is how these things ranjump, and
it’s
is how these things canjump, and
it’s enormously dangerous, and now
we have a global situation on the
back of it, potentially on the back
of one bat. How can the UK and the
international community pressurise
China into closing down these wet
markets that deal in endangered
species and create these zoonotic
vimses
viruses which jump species? How can
vimses which jump species? How ran
we pressurise
viruses which jump species? How can
we pressurise them to close them
down? We have had this one, Sars and
avian ﬂu.
And the lady at the front? After the
people have been in quarantine for
two weeks, what happens if they
taught the
caught the virus while they were
taught the virus while they were
there,
caught the virus while they were
there, within the two weeks? Will
there, within the two weeks? will
they be
there, within the two weeks? Will
they be monitored after being in
quarantine? James, I’m sure you have
quarantine? james, I’m sure you have
been
quarantine? James, I’m sure you have
been briefed
quarantine? james, I’m sure you have
been briefed up
quarantine? James, I’m sure you have
been briefed up to the gills on this
subject as the flight has gone to
subject as the ﬂight has gone to
pick these
subject as the flight has gone to
pick these people up. 150 people are
pick these peopla up. 150 peopla are
coming back,
pick these people up. 150 people are
coming back, 50 from other EU
countries. They are going to this
place in the Wirral where they will
place in the wirral where they will
stay for two
place in the Wirral where they will
stay for two weeks and then what?
Firstly, the simple answer to your
question, Jennifer, is it is
question, jennifer, is it is
absolutely
question, Jennifer, is it is
absolutely right to bring these
people home. We have a
responsibility and we are making
good on that. We are lucky in the UK
that we have some genuine
world—class experts in disease
management. And when these things
happen, the people involved in the
days have done exercises, they have
practised their procedures, they
have practised... The GP, I didn’t
catch your name, I apologise, is
catch your name, Iapologise, is
right. We
catch your name, I apologise, is
right. We disseminate information to
medical practitioners so they know
what to expect, they know the
parameters and the isolation that we
are putting people into will be
are putting peopla into will be
designed
are putting people into will be
designed specifically to make sure
that before people are allowed back
into wider community, they are no
longer a medical risk. These things
are done incredibly professionally
and as I say, we should as a country
he very proud that we have got some
be very proud that we have got some
very experienced practitioners in
this and we have
this and we have exercised ten Pipe,
my mother is from Syria, we had a
fantastic response to the Ebola
vims.
virus. This is incredibly scary, I
understand that and it is of
legitimate people are worried but we
are global experts in dealing with
this kind of thing. The fact the
Chinese have been very open, that
they have communicated with the
international community, that they
are sharing information I think it’s
to their credit and has helped the
global medical community deal with
what is a very, very concerning
situation. What can we all expect to
situation. what ran we all expect to
happen now?
situation. What can we all expect to
happen now? Coronavirus in every
happen now? Coronavims in every
region in China,
happen now? Coronavirus in every
region in China, declared a global
emergency by the World Health
Organization which bring certain
procedures, such as for example
stopping all flights to China,
extraordinary though that may sound.
What
what ran
extraordinary though that may sound.
What can we expect to follow now? I
what ran we expect to follow now? I
am not going to
What can we expect to follow now? I
am not going to speculate. I think
we all agree on the panel, I don’t
pretend to know enough about the
procedures. But in terms of
government policy? I’m not going to
speculate. This is one of those
areas where we do have experts,
medical experts, who are experienced
and practised. They have done
training exercises around this kind
of thing. We will rely on those
experts to use the experience that
therve got to
they’ve got to guide government
therve got to guide government
policy and
they’ve got to guide government
policy and our reaction. But the
point I would say is the headlines
around these things can be
around these things ran be
incredibly
around these things can be
incredibly disconcerting but we are,
as I say, amongst the best in the
world with dealing with these
things. 0K. There is another subject
we had a lot of questions about this
evening because, of course, tonight
is Thursday, tomorrow... Is Friday.
What
what happens
is Thursday, tomorrow... Is Friday.
What happens tomorrow? My goodness!
what happens tomorrow? My goodness!
I spent all last
What happens tomorrow? My goodness!
I spent all last year talking about
it last year. Tomorrow is Brexit
day. Taxi! I’ve got mine already.
jonathan
Jonathan Hodson?
jonathan Hodson?
Are
Jonathan Hodson?
Are those that voted Remain mardy or
justified in trying to curtail
celebrations tomorrow? CHUCKLES
What
what is your
celebrations tomorrow? CHUCKLES
What is your view, Geoff? I am glad
what is your view, Geoff? I am glad
we ran
What is your view, Geoff? I am glad
we can move forward, the general
we ran move forward, the general
election gave
we can move forward, the general
election gave 650 MP5 grow up
tablet. I was sick of the bickering.
Implemented the resort we would be
further ahead. Would you like
celebrations tomorrow? I’m not
bothered, I’m glad we had some
direction on businesses and
entrepreneurs and people like that
ran
can move this country forward.
ran move this country forward.
Geoff,
can move this country forward.
Geoff, Jonathan’s question, are
Geoff, jonathan’s question, are
those
Geoff, Jonathan’s question, are
those who voted remained being
Mahdi? I am with Geoff! In a weird
way, the Remainers are in the best
position to throw a party, they have
the food, the drugs, stockpile is!
We get the idea. Listen, it’s
interesting now, it feels oddly
chilled out. In a strange way. It
chillad out. In a strange way. It
almost
chilled out. In a strange way. It
almost feels like you remember the
film the Truman show when it
film the Tmman show when it
finished
film the Truman show when it
finished and everyone started
watching something else? I’m glad we
are at that point because there has
been so much rancour over the point
and I think the vast majority of
peopla lean
people lean one way or the other and
weirdly at this point I’m thinking
back to a referendum day because we
have all got lost in other arguments
we may be
we may he were not thinking about at
the time. I didn’t go there with any
ill will in my heart. I went there
and I wasn’t thinking about Empire.
I wasn’t feeling anything
xenophobic. I definitely wasn’t
thinking about blue passports but
they are the best colour for a
passport, but that is another issue!
I was offered the chance for Britain
to end the political relationship
that had changed drastically since
we
wejoined
that had changed drastically since
we joined the EU
wejoined the EU and I took it. I
think it’s going to be OK. I know
peopla might
people might scoff at that sort of
peopla might scoff at that sort of
optimism
people might scoff at that sort of
optimism but consumer confidence,
business morale are genuine things.
I will go on record, this will
probably be the thing that bites and
on the backside but I think the
economy will really motor this year.
I think the jobs market will remain
buoyant, I think England will win
Euro 2020. Steady on! Make no
apologies for being optimistic.
APPLAUSE
Right, Sarah? Is this a moment of
celebration or if nothing else,
celabration or if nothing else,
coming
celebration or if nothing else,
coming together? I have
nine—year—old twin boys and they
nine-year-old twin boys and they
have five
nine—year—old twin boys and they
have five football mates coming for
a shepover
a sleepover tomorrow night so
have five football mates coming for
a sleepover tomorrow night sol
a sleepover tomorrow night so I will
a shepover tomorrow night so I will
spend that
a sleepover tomorrow night so I will
spend that night locked in my
bedroom drinking a glass of wine,
with seven boys running about the
with seven boys mnning about the
house!
with seven boys running about the
house! But it is really important
moment and I think we need to
recognise both sides of this Brexit
debate. For many people, being part
of the European Union meant
something very important to them. It
meant something about partnership,
something about progress, something
about having that voice that meant
we could say no to those big global
powers if we needed to because we
stood together. We need to recognise
that, that is what I also felt about
being in the European Union. But
there was always that gap where
there were people that didn’t feel
that way and they didn’t believe
that that was what European Union
was so here we are and we are
leaving. Whilst I won’t be
celebrating, I think that both
sides, you know, Leavers felt they
didn’t recognise their country any
more and Remainers now are thinking,
I want to salvage what I love from
my country. We all want our country
back, right? That’s where we are. We
want to move
wa nt to move forward.
back, right? That’s where we are. We
want to move forward. I think the
“Y
way I would disagree with what you
were saying is there’s a lot more
that we need to pick here. We have
no idea what our immigration
strategy will become a government is
tying itself in knots already about
trade relationships. We don’t know
what kind of deal we are going to
get
set by
what kind of deal we are going to
get by the end of the year, it is
probably going to be a very small
one. We’re probably not going to fix
the services, we have the problem
with Northern Ireland actually, the
economy has already taken a beating
over the last few years, there are
problems here. But I think, Boris
problams here. But I think, Boris
johnson
prohlams here. But I think, Boris
johnson might
problems here. But I think, Boris
Johnson might have been the man to
johnson might have been the man to
kind of
Johnson might have been the man to
kind of win the Brexit war but I
don’t know if he is the man to bring
the peace, do you know what I mean?
He is not necessarily the man who is
going to put in the hard graft to
get this done, not necessarily the
man who wants to bring people
man who wants to bring peopla
together.
man who wants to bring people
together. He has never talked about
levelling up the country until he
won some seats in the north of the
country and I worry about that. I
think that is why he won their
seats. I share your optimism about
our country because I love our
country and we are all brilliant but
this is the moment when we need to
come together. The woman at the back
with the dark hair? I was a
Remainer, I voted
Remainer, Ivoted Remain. I
with the dark hair? I was a
Remainer, Ivoted Remain. lam
hugely relieved the decision has
been made and we are moving forward.
I think it has given an incredible
sign for business and confidence has
been boosted and I hope we will have
an incredibly prosperous year as a
result. What will you be doing
tomorrow? Probably having a glass of
wine. Do lady a little further
forward with the blonde hair?
As a student looking to do a year
abroad next year with the Erasmus
scheme, it’s a worrying time for us
because we don’t know what is going
on. Is there any certainty that you
ran put out to
can put out to students who are
ran put out to students who are
looking to do a
can put out to students who are
looking to do a year abroad, that
our grants will be secure, that we
will be able to go on these
opportunities, because we are
replying and this could change by
the summer so we might not even be
accepted to the partner
universities? James, I will come
universities? james, I will come
back to you in a
universities? James, I will come
back to you in a moment if I may.
Minette, from your perspective is
tomorrow 3 day of celebration of the
tomorrow a day of celebration of the
release
tomorrow 3 day of celebration of the
release of coming together? I have
had about five hours sleep in the
last few days so hopefully I will be
unconscious! LAUGHTER
unconscious! MUGHTER
I hope
unconscious! LAUGHTER
I hope that is because you have been
partying! LAUGHTER
partying! MUGHTER
|
partying! LAUGHTER
I wish! Look, for us,
Iwish! Look, for us, it’s
partying! LAUGHTER
I wish! Look, for us, it’s now
about... This has been democratic,
we are leaving, the Prime Minister
has a really strong mandate now
which is good because it concludes
things and we can move on. But this
things and we ran move on. But this
is about getting
things and we can move on. But this
is about getting Brexit right. We
have done effectively the easy hit,
signed off the withdrawal agreement
and we are going, leaving tomorrow.
But now we have to focus on getting
Brexit right and for as that is all
about trade. For each and every one
of you in this room, that is all
about the food you will be eating,
about maintaining our standards of
animal welfare,
animalwelfare, maintaining our
animal welfare, maintaining our
standards
animalwelfare, maintaining our
standards of environmental
protection. We have to get Brexit
right was that we have a
once—in—a—lifetime chance to design
once-in-a-lifetime chance to design
our own
once—in—a—lifetime chance to design
our own trade policy, our own. The
responsibility of that lies with
this government. Huge pressure on
them but I do think we need to work
in partnership, we need to shape it
and we need to be really clear about
what we want. I will
what we want. I willjust say, it’s
what we want. I will just say, it’s
very
what we want. I willjust say, it’s
very interesting that the voice of
consumers has said standards must be
maintained no matter what. Price is
important, choice is important,
consumer rights is important but
nothing, nothing at the expense of
standards. They go on to say that
70% of consumers really have no idea
7096 of consumers really have no idea
about
70% of consumers really have no idea
about trade policy, have no idea
about how this will impact on the
food in our
food in ourfridges. So there is
food in our fridges. So there is
huge
food in ourfridges. So there is
huge responsibility on us to
challenge government to work with
government, to make sure this isn’t
about getting Brexit done but
getting Brexit right. Brexit is
done, we are leaving, let’s make
sure we get it right for everybody
in this room. APPLAUSE
We may come back to that in a bit
more detail in a moment. Sacha? Are
you planning some huge rave tomorrow
night? I
night? Ithink it is
you planning some huge rave tomorrow
night? I think it is going to be a
very muted... We are entering this
transition period. The student there
that mention 12 months. I don’t
think the transition period will be
finished in 12 months, I really
don’t. Tomorrow will bring on—site
don’t. Tomorrow will bring on-site
relief for
don’t. Tomorrow will bring on—site
relief for me. The three and a half
years we have had this cloud over us
of negativity, of hatred. I think we
have actually lost sight on local
matters that really do matter. For
example, across the whole of the UK,
there is a big homelessness issue.
We are very lucky in Greater
Manchester that the every night
campaign, we have seen a reduction
in homelessness. But we need to look
at that, look at the NHS, we have a
problem with knife crime. I think
once this is out of the way
tomorrow, we can concentrate on
tomorrow, we ran concentrate on
issues
tomorrow, we can concentrate on
issues that really matter locally.
I’m quite relieved about it.
Regarding the night—time economy,
Regarding the night-time economy,
you know,
Regarding the night—time economy,
you know, James, I know you got a
you know, james, I know you got a
degree in
you know, James, I know you got a
degree in hospitality, actually.
Speaking to people who work within
Speaking to peopla who work within
the
Speaking to people who work within
the night—time economy, in
the night-time economy, in
hospitality,
the night—time economy, in
hospitality, especially in hotels,
which so many Europeans who do not
know what is going to happen in the
next 12 months, there is so much
uncertainty. Likewise in the NHS,
there is so much uncertainty. I’m
watching it with interest at what
will happen, but for me, it’s going
to create slight beliefs. So,
to create slight beliefs. 50, James.
to create slight beliefs. So, james.
A number
to create slight beliefs. 50, James.
A number of things to pick up. The
original question was from Jonathan
original question was from jonathan
about
original question was from Jonathan
about our Remainers being killjoys
about celebrating tomorrow night? I
notice Nigel Farage has said his
passion Parliament Square, he is not
passion Partiament Square, he is not
allowed
passion Parliament Square, he is not
allowed her
allowed herfireworks, musical
allowed her fireworks, musical
alcohol.
allowed herfireworks, musical
alcohol. Doesn’t sound much like a
to me! No party I would want to go
to me! No party I would wantto go
to. On that
to me! No party I would want to go
to. On that basis, are you trying to
not celebrate too much tomorrow? Are
you trying to ride two horses? And
how to train for the government in
that sense but you don’t want to
look triumphalist. You had serious
questions from the student for
exampla?
What I would say is, if you want to
what I would say is, if you want to
celebrate
What I would say is, if you want to
celebrate tomorrow night, then do
so, have fun, but I would also say,
if you know people for whom this is
if you know peopla for whom this is
not a
if you know people for whom this is
not a moment of celebration, don’t
mb their
rub their noses in it, because the
mb their noses in it, because the
big
mh their noses in it, because the
big thing
mb their noses in it, because the
big thing about
rub their noses in it, because the
big thing about this is that a
question was asked, and it was a
question that had been rumbling
question that had been mmbling
along below
question that had been rumbling
along below the surface for a very
long time, and it needed to be
resolved. The question was asked,
the country answered, everyone
promised that they would abide by
the decision and it turned out that
only the Conservative Party meant
it. We ended up having a general
election, in large part on this
issue, and the question was answered
for a second time, which is why
tomorrow night we are leaving the
EU. There are people for whom that
EU. There are peopla for whom that
is worrying, and
EU. There are people for whom that
is worrying, and we are absolutely
determined to make sure that, if you
are a European national in the UK,
you know your settled status will be
guaranteed. If you are a student who
wants to study abroad? We have
committed to the Erasmus scheme, the
Prime Minister is an
internationalist and said we want to
be good global member, he says we
will maintain animal welfare,
consumer safety, employment
standards. For the people who want
standards. For the peopla who want
to
standards. For the people who want
to celebrate, for whom it is a
positive thing, right, enjoy
tomorrow evening, and for the people
who had or perhaps still have
genuine worries about what this
change of relationship with the EU
will mean, we are absolutely
determined to calm your concerns and
demonstrate that the UK will be a
globally engaged, high standard,
good global player, and we don’t
need the EU to make us fat. We are a
wonderful country, and we don’t have
to be forced to be wonderful because
of being in the EU. What about
of being in the EU. what about
protecting
of being in the EU. What about
protecting standards? We have some
of the highest animal welfare
standards in the world, that is not
going to change. But we are talking
about our standards, and we always
said we wanted to maintain our
standards, but the point is about
imports which come into this country
where will that legislation sit?
where will that lagislation sit?
It’s
where will that legislation sit?
It’s not in the agricultural bill,
which we have written many farming
organisations, 60 environmentalist
as well to the Prime Minister,
saying, where does that legislation
saying, where does that lagislation
sit? It
saying, where does that legislation
sit? It should be in the
agricultural bill. Still no reply
from where will the legislation sit?
Otherwise, we
Otherwise, wejust
from where will the legislation sit?
Otherwise, we just allow food in
that would be illegal to produce
here.
APPLAUSE
One thing I have never understood...
If you will indulge me, I have
always been a bit envious and I’d
like to do this... I would like the
audience to put their hands up if
what they really want post Brexit is
a massive reduction in food
standards. Plan, Croke no, don’t
answer that question, but that is
not what the net but is asked, she
says, why have you not committed to
maintaining food standards in the
agriculture bill?
The point I’m making is that, now
that the British government is fully
responsible to the British public
for things like trade policy on
immigration policy and that, we will
respond to the desires of the
British people, and there is no
desire to scrap our animal welfare
standards, our
standards, ourfood hygiene
standards, our food hygiene
standards.
standards, ourfood hygiene
standards. Why didn’t you put it in
standards. why didn’t you put it in
the bill?
standards. Why didn’t you put it in
the bill? The British people do not
the bill? The British peopla do not
want it to
the bill? The British people do not
want it to happen and therefore it
will not happen, because this
government will respond to the needs
and the wants of the British people,
and the wants of the British peopla,
and that
and the wants of the British people,
and that is how a democracy should
work. That is what Brexit is all
about. So, if people want something,
about. So, if peopla want something,
you don’t put it
about. So, if people want something,
you don’t put it in law? I am
confused about that.
APPLAUSE
We have got high animal welfare
standards. This country, under a
Tory Prime Minister, Lord Liverpool,
introduced the first animal welfare
legislation in the world. We are a
lagislation in the world. We are a
nation of
legislation in the world. We are a
nation of animal lovers. We are not
going to drop our standards, and
it’s not the EU that forces that are
upon us, it is what we want to do,
and I can’t understand why people
and I can’t understand why peopla
struggle to
and I can’t understand why people
struggle to understand that. Because
you have to legislate it. I don’t
you have to lagislate it. I don’t
think you
you have to legislate it. I don’t
think you need to legislate it. I
think you need to lagislate it. I
think james
think you need to legislate it. I
thinkJames is right, it needs to be
think james is right, it needs to be
consumer
thinkJames is right, it needs to be
consumer led and, with education, I
consumer lad and, with education, I
don’t think
consumer led and, with education, I
don’t think this audience
particularly needs educating, we all
particularty needs educating, we all
live in
particularly needs educating, we all
live in the Peak District and we see
the animals we eat, food welfare,
nobody is going to go around Tesco
and read the agricultural policy and
look to see what is in legislation
look to see what is in lagislation
and
look to see what is in legislation
and what is not, what they need to
see is things that are clearly
labelled, not
labelled, notjust with the welfare
labelled, not just with the welfare
issue, on
labelled, notjust with the welfare
issue, on the front cover of a steak
I would love to see where it has
come from, I want to see how
environmental that farmer has been,
I want the scoring for that and its
welfare, and I want to see the
traceability of it, to see exactly
what sort of animal it is. It sounds
like you have experience? I am a
farmer. I’d like to see cows graded
in a green way, so a
in a green way, so 3 Harry Hill cow
in a green way, so a Harry Hill cow
that is living on
in a green way, so 3 Harry Hill cow
that is living on the more
in a green way, so a Harry Hill cow
that is living on the more that is
promoting bird and insect health, I
would like to see that steak being
branded as a green hairy cow, as
opposed to a mass produced, factory
produced animal, and the same for
chicken. Who here would stand up and
chicken. who here would stand up and
say, yes, I
say, yes, lam
chicken. Who here would stand up and
say, yes, I am going to eat
chlorinated chicken from the US?
They are not. Is chlorinated chicken
definitely not something we are ever
going to see in this country as a
result of a deal with the US? And
Michael Gove was Environment
Secretary, he said that isn’t on the
table, it’s not what we are going to
do
do the American Secretary of State
will try and negotiate the best deal
he ran
he can for the Americans and, you
he ran for the Americans and, you
know what, if
he can for the Americans and, you
know what, if there are things we
don’t want in that deal, we will say
so. So we are not having chlorinated
chicken? Of course not! Hands up who
fancies chlorinated chicken? Why
fancies chlorinated chicken? why
would
fancies chlorinated chicken? Why
would we want to import a load of it
when nobody would eat it? We haven’t
got much more time to one more
question from Catherine Whelpton.
question from Catherine whelpton.
The average
question from Catherine Whelpton.
The average age of owning a mobile
phone is becoming younger. Should we
be concerned? I assume you are
talking about a report which came
out today saying that more than half
of children, just more than half of
children, own a mobile by age seven.
Sacha Lord, should we be concerned?
I don’t think it’s the mobile phone
in itself we should be concerned
about, it is perhaps the apps, the
social media. Everybody is now all
about Instagram, Twitter, and I
don’t know if you have that thing on
your phone which tells you how many
hours you spent on it in a week,
when that pops up it’s scary, and I
think more so than the phone should
concerned about that. I’ve got a son
that is coming up to four years old
and, if he ever sees this, he is not
getting a mobile phone by the age of
seven! He will probably have a
driving licence before having a
mobile phone. As a parent, good luck
with that! But the four—year—old,
with that! But the four-year-old,
but the driving
with that! But the four—year—old,
but the driving licence bid. I don’t
understand why a seven—year—old
understand why a seven-year-old
needs a
understand why a seven—year—old
needs a mobile phone, and we all
know we are addicted to them, we
know the potential damage, and one
of the jobs as a parent is to say
no. I remember, if
no. I remember, ifI
of the jobs as a parent is to say
no. I remember, if I said to my mum,
everybody else is doing it, she
would give me a predictable answer,
berause
because it isn’t necessarily an end
in itself it is rare that I am
shocked by statistics, but over half
shocked by statistic, but over half
of kids
shocked by statistics, but over half
of kids have got a mobile phone by
age seven, I think people have to
stand their ground. The woman in the
red top. Is a teacher, we use mobile
phones in schools and in colleges to
help the students to find vocabulary
to research things and be able to
find things and, as you said, it’s
about being able to use technology
in the way forward. I am pretty sure
that most parents properly give a
that most parents property give a
phone to
that most parents properly give a
phone to their young children at
some point, may be to keep them
busy, may be to keep them safe if
they are walking home from somewhere
for the first time, but it’s about
the safety of that child from other
people and the element of keeping up
with the Joneses for my friend has
with theJoneses for my friend has a
with the joneses for my friend has a
phone,
with theJoneses for my friend has a
phone, everybody has one, I want
one. Driving that down so much
lower, it will make a massive
impact. You have children going for
meals at age two and three, sat at a
table, parents give their phone to
keep them occupied rather than
engaging in conversation.
engaging in conversation. Have your
two nine—year—olds got mobiles?
two nine-year-olds got mobilas?
know. My
two nine—year—olds got mobiles?
know. My ten—year—old is top your
know. My ten-year-old is top your
primary, and she
know. My ten—year—old is top your
primary, and she brought me back a
list of all the people in her class
list of all the peopla in her class
who had
list of all the people in her class
who had mobile phones she did her
research, and about 95% of people
research, and about 9596 of peopla
had a
research, and about 9596 of people
had a phone,
research, and about 95% of people
had a phone, and the school allow
you to take your phone in top year
primary, so the school is telling
you it’s OK, you’ve got all the
other kids, so she got one for
Christmas. There are a few issues,
and one is that there is a huge
social anxiety associated with
having social media all the time,
and you’ve got to watch that, you
can’t let them have these phones in
their bedroom, you can’t let them
look at them all the time because,
if somebody hasn’t replied, there is
an anxiety, and the second thing is
you have to make sure that kids know
what the dangers are. We can’t
assume that we can keep them safe
assume that we ran keep them safe
from
assume that we can keep them safe
from everything, and part of what we
need to be doing is teaching them
where the risks are, what they
should look out for how they should
themselves online. The third thing
is that social media companies need
to take
hhha
is that social media companies need
to take a lot more responsive lady
for what is on their platforms, and
the government need to tell it
legislate for this, because there
are some really nasty stuff out
there and we can’t protect our kids
all the time as a young person, I
had a phone from age 11, mainly for
safety but also because I wanted to
communicate with my friends, and for
a lot of children that is the way it
is. Mainly for children as well, it
sounds weird, but they are more
aware of the dangers facing them
than people now. I knew what I was
than peopla now. I knew what I was
facing when I
than people now. I knew what I was
facing when I was about 13, 14, and
I wasn’t going to
facing when I was about 13, 1A, and
I wasn’t going to go texting
30—year—old men or people who looked
30-year-old men or people who looked
creepy, you know
30—year—old men or people who looked
creepy, you know what you are doing.
It isn’t as cut and dried as people
It isn’t as cut and dried as peopla
think it is. I
It isn’t as cut and dried as people
think it is. Ithink
think it is. I think that point is
really relevant, I think young
people now are so savvy, and I think
peopla now are so savvy, and I think
education
people now are so savvy, and I think
education on social media is
transformed to what it was even a
few years ago. I think seven is far
too young. I held off with my
children until they were using
pub“:
public transport, and then I let
them have a phone. I look forward to
meeting Geoff ‘s 17—year—old son
meeting Geoff ‘s 17-year-old son
without a
meeting Geoff ‘s 17—year—old son
without a phone! I don’t think it
will happen. Obviously a lot of
parents are managing, not forever,
but I think seven is very young. I
agree, absolutely, and we want to be
in contact with our children, to be
able to know that our children can
contact us, and I think 11 is a fair
age. You look keen to talk with your
hand up. I
hand up. Iwould
age. You look keen to talk with your
hand up. I would class a mobile
phone for a youngster as a drug, and
I don’t really think we understand
that dmgs
that drugs take different forms.
It’s not just
It’s notjust about drugs in
nightclubs... So
nightclubs... 50 mobile
It’s notjust about drugs in
nightclubs... So mobile phone use is
a kind of
nightclubs... 50 mobile phone use is
a kind of addiction? It’s an
addiction, it develops dependency
and I’ve seen it in my great
nephews. They get this equipment,
they get it in front of their faces,
and they learn the culture of
meeting it from the moment they wake
“P
up until we go to bed. —— needing
up until we go to bed. -- needing
it. (“an we
up until we go to bed. —— needing
it. Can we not see this as a drug
it. (“an we not see this as a dmg
issue that
it. Can we not see this as a drug
issue that actually needs to be
addressed? As a really serious issue
that’s going to develop dependency
in later life? James, briefly, are
in later life? james, brieﬂy, are
you concerned
in later life? James, briefly, are
you concerned about the decreasing
age at which kids are using mobile
phones? I didn’t see the report, but
seven shocks me. Having that number
of children that young. I think
that, I hear what you are saying
about young people being more savvy,
about young peopla being more savvy,
and I
about young people being more savvy,
and I think there is a generation,
digital natives, people who are much
digital natives, peopla who are much
more
digital natives, people who are much
more used to living their lives in
social media, but in the same way
that my kids, you teach them about
road safety, you teach them about
being a bit careful, and I had a
very awkward dad conversation about,
you know, reminding them that what
you upload and sent to your friends
never, ever, ever goes away, I
never, ever, ever goes away, Isaid,
if you don’t fancy having a picture
perhaps brought up during a job
interview in 20 years time, perhaps
don’t take it and send it to
someone, so I had to have some of
those awkward conversations. Sarah
is right, we need to look at social
media companies, and the ombudsman
will look at that, and we have to be
very conscious about social
pressure, addiction, online
bullying. There is a lot wrapped up
in this, but I think mobile phones
are an inevitable part of modern
life, but we have to be careful.
Could keep talking about this, but I
am afraid we are out of time.
am afraid we are out of time. The
hour is up. Let me remind you that
next week will be in Hopkinton and
the week after in Dundee, so come
and join us. -- next
and join us. —— next week we will be
and join us. -- next week we will be
in Hopkinton. And,
and join us. —— next week we will be
in Hopkinton. And, if you’d like to
marry on
carry on the conversation, as we
tmly put in
truly put in here, you can
carry on the conversation, as we
truly put in here, you canjoin
tmly put in here, you ranjoin
Adrian
truly put in here, you canjoin
Adrian Charles and guests on
Question Time Extra Time Maul, Which
Question Time Extra Time Maul, which
Is On
Question Time Extra Time Maul, Which
Is On Radio 5 Live Right Now. It
just Remains
Just Remains For Me To Say, Thank
just Remains For Me To Say, Thank
You To The
Just Remains For Me To Say, Thank
You To The Panel, I am sorry I
couldn’t get read more a few, and
thank you to you at home for
watching and listening. —— I’m sorry
watching and listening. -- I’m sorry
I couldn’t get
watching and listening. —— I’m sorry
I couldn’t get round more of you.
From Buxton, goodbye
The plan is Universal Credit today,
employed tomorrow.
We are the payer of last resort.
I’ve had to use food banks.
What we do every day is really
serious. I want a properjob.
I didn’t think I’d find myself at
47 years of age on the streets.
BBC TWO gets unprecedented access
to Government and claimants...
The press have said
this could be a nerve agent.
It’s time for me to move on.
Clarissa, no.
What don’t the army want us to find?
You’ve got a chemical equation here.
Jack... 7
Not everyone gets out alive.
Hello, I’m
Hello, I’mJeremy
Hello, I’m Jeremy Vine and I am with
Hello, I’m jeremy Vine and I am with
Tony Hall, the
Hello, I’m Jeremy Vine and I am with
Tony Hall, the director—general of
Tony Hall, the director-general of
the BBC, to
Tony Hall, the director—general of
the BBC, to celebrate Brexitcast!
CHEERING AND APPLAUSE
CHEERING AND APPMUSE
I
CHEERING AND APPLAUSE
I would like to give a warm welcome
to our host tonight, who we’ve
managed to miraculously get in the
same room for once, our very own
political Aber, certified Brexit
doctor Katya Adler and Yorkshire’s
answer to David Dimbleby, Chris
answer to David Dimblaby, Chris
Mason.
answer to David Dimbleby, Chris
Mason. CHEERING AND APPLAUSE
Thank you, so nice to see you. Nice
to see, thanks for doing this. Do I
get to kiss you as well? Shall we
set? And to make up the foursome,
the BBC’s
the BBC’s political editor Laura
Coombes and —— Laura Kuenssberg and
Coombes and -- [aura Kuenssberg and
Adam Flaming!
Coombes and —— Laura Kuenssberg and
Adam Fleming! CHEERING AND APPLAUSE
Where is my case?
Where is my case? —— kiss. Honestly,
where is my use? -- kiss. Honestly,
this is really
Where is my case? —— kiss. Honestly,
this is really thrilling for us. We
are listeners. I bumped into you
because I was getting at 4:16 and
because I was getting at 4:45 and
listening to
because I was getting at 4:16 and
listening to the last few minutes on
five live. Congratulations, can you
five live. Congratulations, ran you
accept the
five live. Congratulations, can you
accept the praise? Of course, easy!
You know what we have announced
today, Brexitcast is our most
successful podcast on BBC Sounds, a
successful podrast on BBC Sounds, a
record 18
successful podcast on BBC Sounds, a
record 18 million downloads.
APPLAUSE
That is fantastic! So, is this the
end? Let’s go through the timetable.
end? Let’s go through the timetabla.
We will
end? Let’s go through the timetable.
We will do the show, then we will do
a live show tomorrow
alive show tomorrow night on radio
a live show tomorrow night on radio
4 at 11.01.
alive show tomorrow night on radio
[rat 11.01. The
4 at 11.01. The first programme to
be broadcast in the new era and it
will just be me
willjust be me and Chris chatting
will just be me and Chris chatting
ten
willjust be me and Chris chatting
ten minutes until Laura and Katya
ten minutes until [aura and Katya
turn up. Then
ten minutes until Laura and Katya
turn up. Then Brexitcast will go
turn up. Then Brexitrast will go
into its
turn up. Then Brexitcast will go
into its own transition period where
it will be called Newscast. We will
it will be rallad Newscast. We will
take
it will be called Newscast. We will
take the
it will be rallad Newscast. We will
take the way
it will be called Newscast. We will
take the way we have done Brexit
with a really BDI for the detail but
also enjoying it at the same time.
We will apply it to every other news
story in the world. A
story in the world. Aland grab! But
story in the world. A land grab! But
the most
story in the world. Aland grab! But
the most important thing is we will
be getting together all the time to
talk about what has happened after
Brexit. I
Brexit. Ijust want
talk about what has happened after
Brexit. I just want to say one more
Brexit. Ijust want to say one more
time to all
Brexit. I just want to say one more
time to all of you, thank you for
Brexitcast and here is on to the
Brexitrast and here is on to the
next chapter!
Brexitcast and here is on to the
next chapter! APPLAUSE
Thank you! Now, we will experiment
here, something new for Brexitcast.
here, something new for Brexitrast.
A tribute
here, something new for Brexitcast.
A tribute to Nicholas Parsons. We
would like to challenge the four of
you to a just A
you to 3 Just A Minute. Now,